   ____  ____  ____  _  _   ___  ____  ___  ___  ____  __  __    __    __   
  (  _ \(  _ \(_  _)( \( ) / __)( ___)/ __)/ __)(_  _)(  )(  )  /__\  (  )  
   )  _/ )   / _)(_ ) |  (( (__  )__) \__ \\__ \  )(   )(__)(  /(__)\  )(__ 
  (__)  (_)\_)(____)(_)\_) \___)(____)(___/(___/ (__) (______)(__)(__)(____)
                            _____  ____   ___  _  _ 
                           (  _  )(  _ \ / __)( \/ )
                           ) (_) ()    /( (_-. \  / 
                           (_____)(_)\_) \___/ (__) 

                               Princesstual Orgy
                     (Tashiro Masashi no Princess ga Ippai)
                               Instruction Manual
                                     v1.00
                                    
-------------------------------- INTRODUCTION ---------------------------------

Tashiro Masashi no Princess ga Ippai is an action game released by Sony for the
Famicom game system in 1989. It was never officially translated into English
but was translated by Suicidal Translations and released under the name 
Princesstual Orgy on September 3rd, 2001.

This file serves as an instruction manual for the translated game. It is not a
translation of the original instruction manual but is an original work based on
my experiences playing the game.

------------------------------ TABLE OF CONTENTS ------------------------------

  I. Introduction
 II. Table of Contents
III. The Story
 IV. Gameplay
  V. Distribution Notes
 VI. Conclusion

---------------------------------- THE STORY ----------------------------------

You play as Tashiro Masashi, a Japanese comedian, who is awakened from sleep by
a fairy who asks him to come rescue the princesses of Fairyland who have been
kidnapped by a band of witches. Mashi must brave 4 levels of bizzare terrain to
make it to each of the 4 witches castles to rescue each of the beloved & kawaii
princesses or Fairyland will fall into the hands of the dreaded Ultra Witch.

---------------------------------- GAMEPLAY -----------------------------------

This is a simple NES action game, so gameplay isn't exceptionally difficult.
From the title screen, you have the options of Start and Continue. Start will
begin a new game and Continue will allow you to input the password that you get
at the end of each of the levels.

General play control is simple:

Left/Right: move left/right
      Down: crouch/climb down ropes
        Up: aim weapon upward/climb up ropes
         B: shoot YoYoo / run faster
         A: jump
     Start: open item select screen


LEVELS
------

When you begin a new game (or after you beat a level) you have the option of
choosing which stage to begin. It doesn't matter what order you play the stages
in though some are easier than others, so I recommend starting with the Ice
Witch level. The four initial stages are:

Ice Witch - The Ice Witch resides in a typical generic outdoors and town level.
When you defeat the Ice Witch, you receive the Ice YoYo which temporarily
freezes your enemies before destroying them.

Plant Witch - The Plant Witch makes her home in a swamp populated by underground
caverns. After you defeat the Plant Witch, you will receive the Plant YoYo which
causes enemies to explode, destroying any other enemies caught in the aftermath.

Fire Witch - The Fire Witch's castle lies on the other side of the ocean and you
must swim to the other side to confront her. If you succeed, you'll obtain the
Fire YoYo which causes any enemy struck with it to burst into flames.

Stone Witch - The Stone Witch's castle is hidden deep within an ancient forest.
If you can destroy her, you'll receive the Stone YoYo which turns your enemies
into blocks of stone that you can use to reach greater heights.

After traversing an entire level, you'll then find yourself at the witch's
castle. You must first locate the guardian of the key to the witch's chamber
and then enter the chamber itself. Once you've defeated the witch, you must
escort the princess out of the castle before it collapses.

When you've defeated all 4 witch's, you'll then head to the island in the sky
where you must first traverse a top-down overworld (ala Rygar) and then enter
the Ultra Witch's castle where you must seek out and destroy the ultimate evil
in order to bring peace to Fairyland.


ITEMS
-----

In addition to the special YoYos you get by defeating the witches, there are
several other items that you can get by randomly shooting your YoYo at various
points. These include:

Triple Shot - The Triple Shot (which looks like a triangle) will allow you to
shoot 3 YoYos at once.

Quadruple Shot - The Quadruple Shot (which looks like a star) will allow you to
shoot 4 YoYos at once, 3 to the front and 1 to the back.

Longer String - Longer String (which looks like a roll of string) increases the
distance that your YoYos go.

Bottles - Bottles (which look like bottles, go figure) will either add 10
points to your life total or poison you, subtracting points and causing you to
wretch.

Small Hearts - Small Hearts appear when you kill an enemy and add 10 points to
your life total.

Large Hearts - Large Hearts appear after you kill certain enemies and add 50
points to your life total.

Princesstual Portrait - If you're lucky enough to find a picture of a princess,
you'll gain 100 points onto your life total.

Fairy - I haven't figured out what the fairies do but you occasionall find one.

Chain - The Chain is a stronger variant of the standard YoYo.

Ring - The Ring reduces the amount of damage you take when hit by an enemy.

Crown - In each level, you'll encounter an ally who will give you a crown that
effectively doubles your offensive power. Be careful, if you accidentally shoot
your ally before receiving the crown, they'll disappear. After the first time,
you'll have one other opportunity to meet them and obtain the crown but if you
shoot them again, they won't come back.

----------------------------- DISTRIBUTION NOTES ------------------------------

This Princesstual Orgy translation should be distributed in a file named 
pov100.zip and should contain the following files:

	   pov100.ips - the translation patch
  princesstual.txt - the readme file
	   po-man.txt - this manual

All three files are (C)opyright 2001 by Suicidal Translations. All rights
reserved. You may distribute this translation in any manner you desire as long
as the original archive remains intact with no modifications and the archive is
distributed free of charge.

Tashiro Masashi no Princess ga Ippai is (C)opyright 1989 by CBS/Sony Group Inc.

---------------------------------- CONCLUSION ---------------------------------

So there you have it. Not the most complex game of all time but I rather enjoy
it. It won't take you hours on end to defeat like some other games but it's
well worth playing when you're just out to have a little fun.

If you have any questions, feel free to ask. The official site of the 
Princesstual Orgy translation is at http://www.pigtails.net/ST and you can find
the most current contact information there as well.

-InVerse

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Princesstual Orgy Manual     -     (C)opyright 2001 InVerse     -      09/03/01