           $$$$$                                          $                $   
         $$$$   $           $$               $$          $$               $$   
       $$$$$                 $                $          $$               $$   
      $$$$$                                              $$               $$   
       $$$$$     $        $ $     $$$$$$$    $     $$$$$$$$    $$$$$$$$   $$   
         $$$$$   $$      $$ $$   $$      $$  $$   $$    $$$   $$     $$   $$   
           $$$$  $$      $$ $$  $$           $$  $$      $$  $$      $$   $$   
         $$$$$   $$      $$ $$ $$$           $$ $$        $ $$$      $$   $$   
   $   $$$$$     $$      $$ $$  $$           $$  $$      $$  $$      $$   $$   
    $$$$$         $$    $$  $$   $$      $$  $$   $$    $$$   $$     $$$  $$   
                   $$$$$$   $$    $$$$$$$    $$    $$$$$$$$    $$$$$$  $  $$   
  $$$$$$                                                                       
$$$$$$$$$$                            $            $   $$                      
$   $$   $                            $$          $$    $                      
    $$    $$$$$   $$$    $$$$   $$$$$ $$  $$$   $$$$$$      $$$   $$$$   $$$$$ 
    $$   $$    $ $   $  $    $ $      $$ $   $    $$   $   $   $ $    $ $      
    $$   $$    $ $   $  $    $  $$$$  $$ $   $    $$   $$  $   $ $    $  $$$$  
    $$   $$      $   $  $    $      $ $$ $   $    $$   $$  $   $ $    $      $ 
   $$$$  $$       $$$ $ $    $ $$$$$  $$  $$$ $   $$   $$   $$$  $    $ $$$$$  

                              Princesstual Orgy
                             English to Japanese 
                                 Translation
                                   v. 1.00

-------------------------- DEDICATION & INSPIRATION ---------------------------

This translation is dedicated to Spinner 8 because of it's hentai-sounding
title. I know Spinner is the King of 8-Bit Hentai so hopefully this dedication
will appease him so he won't devour me for pseudo-encroaching on his territory.
He also founded & co-maintains The Whirlpool (http://donut.parodius.com) which
is the #1 site for ROM translation news. Oh, and he beta tested the game for me
even though he hated it.

To be honest, I can't remember exactly what music I was listening to as I
worked on this project but I've had the same song stuck in my head for 4 days
now and it won't go away (and I'm sure I listened to it once or twice while
working on the game) so I chose the song Alive that Joey Lauren Adams sings in
Chasing Amy. It's a kick ass movie (as are all Kevin Smith movies) and you
should definitely see it.


       I'm feeling nothing / but all alone / just missing someone /
       I don't even know / but until I find them / I'll wait patiently /
       just feeling nothing / inside of me.
       
               - Joey Lauren Adams "Alive"

------------------------------ TABLE OF CONTENTS ------------------------------

    I. Dedication & Inspiration
   II. Table of Contents
  III. Introduction
   IV. Version History
    V. Distribution Notes
   VI. Technical Notes
  VII. Staff
 VIII. Tools
   IX. Patching Instructions (** READ THIS BEFORE ASKING QUESTIONS!! **)
    X. Contact Information
   XI. Closing

--------------------------------- INTRODUCTION --------------------------------

Princesstual Orgy is an odd little game with a good mix of action. It reminds
me of old-school PC games like Duke Nukem (the original 2D version) with bits
and pieces of games such as Rygar, Goonies II and The Little Mermaid.
	I picked this game up at random a couple of months ago while combing 
through ROM sites and I liked the mix of action, so I decided to translate it.
There was the occasional problem with lack of space but, for the most part, it
was a relatively simple hack. There was a bit of a problem with the title
screen but I was able to fix that and now you should have a complete 
translation for a game you probably didn't even know existed before you 
downloaded the patch.

-------------------------------- VERSION HISTORY -------------------------------

v. 1.00 - September 03, 2001

What's Complete
 - all text translated
 - minor graphics hacking (title screen)

What's Incomplete
 - Nothing that I'm aware of...

----------------------------- DISTRIBUTION NOTES ------------------------------

This Princesstual Orgy translation should be distributed in a file named
po100.zip and should contain the following files:

	    po100.ips - the translation patch
  princesstual.txt - this readme file
	   po-man.txt - a manual for the game

All three files are (C)opyright 2001 by Suicidal Translations. All rights
reserved. You may distribute this translation in any manner you desire as long
as the original archive remains intact with no modifications and the archive is
distributed free of charge.

Tashiro Masashi no Princess ga Ippai is (C)opyright 1989 by CBS/Sony Group Inc.
	

------------------------------- TECHNICAL NOTES -------------------------------

First, a note on the title. The Japanese name of the game is Tashiro Masashi no
Princess ga Ippai which literally translated into Tashiro Masashi's Lots of 
Princesses. That just really sounded like an awkward title to me so I decided
to find something with a bit more of a ring to it. I eventually came up with
Princesstual Orgy which, while sounding like a hentai game, actually means the
same thing as the original title since orgy can (among other things) mean "a
lot of" and princesstual means "pertaining to princesses". Hence, princesstual
orgy means "a lot of princesses".
	I attempted to keep the translation accurate to the original text but that
wasn't possible in a few locations, so I chose something that would fit within
the allotted space without altering the actual meaning of the text.

Recommended Emulator: Princesstual Orgy works just fine in Nesticle which is
my emulator of choice due to the fact that I'm on an extremely slow computer.
It will presumably work fine in just about any emulator.

------------------------------------ STAFF ------------------------------------

    Hacking - InVerse - http://www.pigtails.net/ST

Translating - Simon Fang - osenbei@hotmail.com 

	  Font - _Bnu - http://x68kpile.com
	  
------------------------------------ TOOLS ------------------------------------

The following tools were used during this translation:

     Hexposure: hex editing for translation and graphic maneuvering
Tile Layer Pro: graphics hacking & font insertion
      Nesticle: some graphic hacking & beta testing
   Patch Maker: IPS patch creation
          GiMP: title screen design

Most of these tools, as well as ROM hacking tutorials can be downloaded from
RHDO (http://www.romhacking.org) or Zophar's Domain (http://www.zophar.net).

----------------------------- PATCHING INSTRUCTIONS ---------------------------

Patching a ROM is extremely simple. You need three things. A ROM, the patch and
a patching program. To patch with ips.exe, you simply type:

	ips <ROM name> <patch name>

So if your ROM was named motoc.nes and the patch was named mxv100.ips you would
type:

	ips motoc.nes mxv100.ips

Make sure you have the ROM, the patch and IPS in the same directory.	
	
To patch with SNES Tool, simply select USE IPS, choose the patch and then 
select the ROM to which you wish to apply the patch. It's self explanatory. If 
you can't figure it out, the game is probably too hard for you anywayz.

To patch with IPSWin, you simply select the ROM you want to patch, the patch
you wish to apply and then click Patch. Once again, if you can't figure it out,
the game is probably too hard for you.

------------------------------ CONTACT INFORMATION ----------------------------

 The official Princesstual Orgy home page is currently located at 
 http://www.pigtails.net/ST

 E-Mail addresses concerning the project can be located on the official page.

 Do NOT, under ANY circumstances, ask for ROMs. You will not only be denied,
 you will have your request for illegal files forwarded to your ISP.
 
------------------------------------ CLOSING ----------------------------------

 So there you have it. Have fun and remember, it's just a game.

 -InVerse