-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wizardry V: Uncensored English Edition ReadMe
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

While a fully English release of Wizardry V was published in North America, 
that version contained a great deal of censorship.  All references to nudity,
alcohol, blood, violence, and religion were replaced.  This hack makes it
easier for English players to experience this game as it was originally
intended.

This hack translates the switch/options screen in the Japanese version of
Wizardry V: Heart of the Maelstrom into English.  It also changes the default
character names, the default language, and the default character set to use
when naming your characters.  The Japanese version of Wizardry V already had
the ability to display text in either English or Japanese, but English
players had to navigate the untranslated switch menu, which had five
different switches for changing different parts of the text from one language
to another.  This hack combines those into a single switch that controls all
of the in-game text.  Additionally, several grammatical errors in the game's
text were corrected.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patching Information
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This ips patch is intended for a headerless, Japanese version of 
Wizardry V: Heart of the Maelstrom for the Super Famicom.  You can easily
tell if your file has a header by checking the file size.  The headerless ROM
will have a size of 1,048,576 bytes, while a ROM with a header will be
1,049,088 bytes.  It's always a good idea to back up your file prior to
patching in case there is a mismatch, or if you've applied multiple patches
that turn out to be incompatible.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Important Notes
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you played the game previously, a save game will already exist, and the
existing options will not be reset.  In this case, it is recommended to visit
the switch screen and toggle the "TEXT" switch at least once while setting
the language to your preference (USA for English or JPN for Japanese).  This
will ensure that all the game's text is properly translated.  Aside from
this, saves from the original version should be compatible with this hack.

If any of the default characters with Japanese names are present before the
hack is installed, they will remain unless you delete them manually from the
Training Grounds menu, delete/move your .srm file, or reset backup data.  To
reset backup data, delete all characters from the training grounds, and then
attempt to delete again.  You will be presented with the option to reset
backup data, which will delete all character data, all mapping progress, all
NPC encounters, Boltac's trading post, and memos.  Once you restart the game,
the default characters will automatically be created with their English
names.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Version History
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.0 (1/14/17)

-Tileset for the switch/options menu was modified to be similar to the North
American release of Wizardry V, while retaining the ability to switch
languages.  All text is now controlled with a single switch instead of five.

-Default character set when naming characters was changed to be English or
Japanese, depending on which language you selected in the switch menu.  The
original game remembered which character set you used last, and would display
it first, even if it was Japanese and all other text was in English.

-The default language when you first create a save game is now set to English
instead of Japanese.

-Names of the default characters were set to their English translations.  If
an existing save was present prior to applying the patch, already existing
characters will keep their names and information.

-Several grammar errors were corrected in the English text.  Some instances
of the "stoned" status effect were changed to "petrify", "ashe" was changed
to "ashes".


Version 1.1 (9/04/17)

-When dropping an equipped item, fixed a typo: "equiped" is now "equipped".

-Corrected the "I didn't know you were still there!" text when an NPC has
nothing else to say to you.  Previously it was "I did'nt know you are still
there!"

-Fixed an error in the text before the final battle: "Within a nexus a roaring
flames" => "Within a nexus of roaring flames".

-Near the timeless room on level 3, fixed a glitch that prevented one of the
lines of text from showing up.  Text now correctly reads "A quiet silence echoes
in a room with walls lined in White Curtains".  This glitch was also in the
official North American release.


Enjoy!
-darkmoon2321
