                              __    __ _ _   _    
                             / / /\ \ (_) |_( )__ 
                             \ \/  \/ / | __|/ __|
                              \  /\  /| | |_ \__ \
                               \/  \/ |_|\__||___/

                                        
                                     Wit's
                               Instruction Manual
                                     v1.00
                                    
-------------------------------- INTRODUCTION ---------------------------------

Wit's is an action game released by Athena for the Famicom game system in 1990.
It was never officially translated into English but was translated by Suicidal
Translations and released on February 28th, 2003.

This file serves as an instruction manual for the translated game. It is not a
translation of the original instruction manual but is an original work based on
my experiences playing the game.

------------------------------ TABLE OF CONTENTS ------------------------------

  I. Introduction
 II. Table of Contents
III. The Story
 IV. Gameplay
  V. Distribution Notes
 VI. Conclusion

---------------------------------- THE STORY ----------------------------------

Joe was hit by a car and transformed into the superhero Naked Man. Dr. Wit's
attempted to recruit Naked Man into his evil Joke Army, but Joe refused. Now he
must do battle the evil Joke Army in a battle of speed and skill to prevent them
from taking over the world.

---------------------------------- GAMEPLAY -----------------------------------

As with most NES action games, gameplay isn't particularly difficult. The
initial options should be obvious. You can choose between 1, 2, 3 and 4 player
games. After that, it's just run and gun, baby, run and gun.

General play control is as such:

Left/Right: move left/right
   Up/Down: move up/down
         B: jump
         A: speed up
     Start: tea & crumpets


LEVELS
------

You must do battle with the five members of Dr. Wit's Joke Army in order to
save the world. You can choose to fight them in any order, but they are
increasingly difficult from left to right. For the purposes of this manual, I
will refer to them as levels one through five, with one being on the left and
five being on the right. There are five rounds in each battle. The first three
are on foot (or wing, or belly, or ice skates, accordingly) and the fourth and
fifth levels are on Segways.

Level One - Suicide Smurf: Sure, he looks like a man in a blue spandex suit in
the portrait, but once you get into the game, you realize he's just a kamikaze
smurf with Nikes. Nothing special about this level, just surround him and ram
him.

Level Two - Herman Birdman: In level two, you take to the skies. The only
difference between this level and the last is that Herman can jump multiple
times. I don't know why you don't just fly under the wall when it approaches,
but I guess maybe Dr. Wit sabotaged your wings or something.

Level Three - Jonny Madrox: Level three brings you the
cheating motherbitch twin brother of Multiple Man. You don't just have to ram
him into the wall, you have to ram all four of him into walls!

Level Four - Waterboy: Next up is Aquaman's heterosexual life partner Waterboy.
In this level, you swim instead of run or fly. Basically, this means that the
game makes different noises when you're moving. There are also walls on the
field before you start, which makes it slightly more difficult than the previous
levels. Oh, and you get boats instead of motorcyles in this one.

Level Five - Tony Harding: Time for the obligatory slippery ice stage. Just like
the stage before it except you have to start turning a couple of blocks earlier
than normal because you'll slip, slide and crash. I like crashing in rounds four
and five because you get to see the dogs from the dogsleds run away.

Level Six - Dr. Wit: And now it's time for the final battle. But wait, Dr. Wit
isn't a real doctor, he's actually Sully from Monsters Inc.! He's pissed off
that you dented the bumper of his car when he ran over you in the intro and is
out for revenge! He has the cloning ability of Johnny Madrox, the slippery level
of Tony Harding and the gay breast stroke of Waterboy. How can you ever hope to
defeat such a menace? Pretty much the same way you beat all the rest of them.

----------------------------- DISTRIBUTION NOTES ------------------------------

This Wit's translation should be distributed in a file named witse100.zip and
should contain the following files:

	  witsev100.ips - the translation patch
 	  witsev100.txt - this readme file
	   wits-man.txt - a manual for the game

These files are (C)opyright 2003 by Suicidal Translations. All rights reserved.
You may distribute this translation in any manner you desire as long as the
original archive remains intact with no modifications and the archive is
distributed free of charge.

Wit's is (C)opyright 1990 by Athena Co. LTD.

---------------------------------- CONCLUSION ---------------------------------

So there you have it. Not the most complex game of all time but it's quite fun
in multi-player mode. So if you ever have 2 friends over and are thinking to
yourself that it would be nice to have a 3 player game, here you go!

If you have any questions, feel free to ask. The official site of the 
Wit's translation is at http://www.pigtails.net/ST and you can find the most
current contact information there as well.

-InVerse

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wit's          -          (C)opyright 2003 InVerse          -          02/28/03