The Morning Adventure
Spanish -> English Patch
========================

Info
----

The Morning Adventure is an advergame for Mañanitos, a kind of chocolate chip
bun marketed in Spain by Panrico as a breakfast food. It was never released to
stores, and its existence is probably completely unknown to most; even I only
found out about it yesterday, and I'm the guy who friggin' translated it.

Basically it's a brief (five stages plus boss) platformer, set mostly indoors--
your house, school, etc. You play as Mañanito Boy, and spend your time
completing simple missions like waking up your brothers, tidying up after you
finish eating your delicious Mañanitos, and making it to school on time. It was
developed by Bit Managers (http://www.bitmanagers.com/) and released in 2003.

There's a couple of food items to collect, one is the standard Mario coins/
Sonic rings collect-100-for-a-bonus-life object, while the other, the Mañanito,
allows you to run faster and jump higher, sometimes just making things easier
but others strictly necessary to progress. You can also pick up objects by
hitting B, including crates and springs which you can jump on for a bit more
altitude, necessary for some of the puzzles which basically all involve walls
that you can't get over.

Hacking Work
------------

The text is right there in the ROM in ASCII, I just barged in and started
typing. Your grandma could have done this hack. There was even a comfortable
amount of padding on all dialogue which meant that I didn't even have to bother
messing with pointers or anything. The translations are a combination of the
combined Spanish ability of my wife and I plus assistance from Google
Translate. Yeah, yeah; whatever.

I blow at hacking so when it came to graphics hacking for the title screen I
ended up enlisting Prof. 9, who did some great work both modifying the
character order (PULSA -> PRESS) and finishing up (by almost entirely redoing)
my really shoddy "E". This was the only real "hacking" and was the real
difficult part, all kudos go to Prof. 9.

All the dialogue should be done, even the credits have been de-Spanished; there
was actually some extra text in the ROM (some stuff about completing the "demo"
and telling you to purchase the full game--no idea if there was ever a demo
version, but this is the full game so the demo line is never seen in-game). If
I missed anything then that sucks.

Patching
--------

It's an IPS patch. I'm not helping you. 

Version History
---------------

1.01 - 2010-04-20
Fixed typo.

1.0 - 2010-04-19
Should be complete.

Credits
-------

Prof. 9
Title screen hacking, art

Vague Rant
http://vaguerant.tumblr.com/
Text translation + insertion, readme

RifleEyes
http://rifleeyes.tumblr.com/
Translation advice, how to type ñ